# rl-confidence-calibration

This is the repository for the paper [will not release more details to maintain anonymity since paper is under peer review].

### Note: Code Version to Use

If reproducibility for the experiments in the main sections of the paper is necessary, then refer to branch ```reproducibility```, which will contain the code used to run the experiments in the main paper and the corresponding libraries used. 

Otherwise, the ```main``` branch should be used. It has more updated library versions to support newer large language models and more features such as out-of-distribution evaluation.

### Files Used

The repository has 7 core files which are used for running experiments. The files, with the first 6 arranged in execution order, are as follows:

1. **prepare_datasets.py**: Downloads all datasets and converts the dataset into a consistent format for subsequent preprocessing and training.

2. **preprocess_dataset.py**: Collects initial responses from LLM, using a format enforcer to enforce format following, and formats these responses into a template response format for future fine-tuning.

3. **finetune_model.py**: Finetunes LLM to follow the instructed output format, using the LLM's own responses from preprocessing to avoid external knowledge leakage. This is necessary as smaller LLM may struggle to follow instructions on prompt format.

4. **rl_confidence_calibration.py**: The main reinforcement learning (RL) step, used to train large language models. Upon request, the output can optionally be uploaded to wandb. Our use of Unsloth enabled us to run the program on a single 3g.47gb H100 instance, fine-tuning Qwen 2.5 (3B) Instruct using RL.

5. **evaluate_model.py**: Evaluates the RL model using the test set. Also supports evaluating models generated after the instruction fine-tuning but before RL, and zero-shot base models. Outputs a results file that can be used to analyze the results.

6. **analyze_model.py**: Based on a results file generated by evaluate_model.py, outputs statistics detailing the accuracy and the confidence calibration ability of the LLM.

7. **utils.py**: This file is a utilities file to reduce duplication of code between files.

### Code Requirements 

Software requirements: The libraries used for the experiment can be found on requirements.py. 

Hardware requirements: One NVIDIA Ampere to Blackwell GPU with CUDA NVCC version at least 12.0; VRAM of 47 GiB tested to work.

Program may work with less VRAM, but we cannot guarantee that it will work. Still, it is worth trying with a high-end consumer GPU such as an NVIDIA RTX 5090.

### Code Reproduction Steps

To reproduce the results in the main experiments, follow the steps shown below:

1. Install the relevant libraries using ```requirements.txt```. We used miniforge to install the Python environment and pip to install the Python packages, but uv and pyenv are expected to work (not tested).

2. Run ```prepare_datasets.py``` to download the dataset files and split the dataset into train and test sets. Simply call ```python prepare_datasets.py```.

3. Run ```preprocess_dataset.py``` to run the LLM model on a preliminary set of questions in the training set to generate an auxiliary training dataset consisting of questions and properly formatted versions of the LLM responses in accordance to the format during the reinforcement learning stage. This is necessary as small LLM may not be able to appropriately follow formatting instructions.

Example usage:
```
CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0 python preprocess_dataset.py --dataset_name bigmath --llm qwen2.5-3b --max_output_tokens 2048 --llm_confidence --confidence_analysis &> preprocess_bigmath_qwen2.5-3b_llm-confidence-and-analysis.txt &
```

4. Run ```finetune_model.py``` to finetune the LLM, training it to follow the format for the reinforcement learning stage.

Example usage:
```
CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0 python finetune_model.py --dataset_name bigmath --llm qwen2.5-3b --lora_rank 32 --llm_confidence --confidence_analysis &> finetune_bigmath_qwen2.5-3b_llm-confidence-and-analysis.txt &
```

Note: ```--lora_rank``` parameter should be consistent throughout the rest of the run.

5. Run ```rl_confidence_calibration.py``` to calibrate the LLM in confidence calibration. This step can take several days to complete. 

Example usage:
```
CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0,rl_bigmath_qwen2.5-3b_brier-1_llm-confidence-and-analysis python rl_confidence_calibration.py --dataset_name bigmath --llm qwen2.5-3b --reward_function brier-1 --max_output_tokens 2048 --lora_rank 32 --num_generations 8 --questions_per_batch 64 --num_training_steps 500 --num_cpu_threads 8 --unsloth_grpo_mini_batch_size 16 --unsloth_max_chunk_length 4096 --llm_confidence --confidence_analysis --use_wandb --wandb_team_name [TEAM_NAME] --wandb_project_name [PROJECT_NAME] &> rl_bigmath_qwen2.5-3b_brier-1_llm-confidence-and-analysis.txt &

```

Note: We added an invalid CUDA device number intentionally. This is because Unsloth has a temporary file stored during the reinforcement learning process which is tied to the CUDA device number. When running on different nodes with a common storage system, without the workaround of adding the invalid CUDA device number, there can be more than one node, corresponding to different experiments, accessing the same file, which may lead to silent experimental inaccuracies.

Note 2: ```--use_wandb --wandb_team_name [TEAM_NAME] --wandb_project_name [PROJECT_NAME]``` is optional and can be left out. When left out, the results will not be uploaded to wandb.

6. Run ```evaluate_model.py``` to evaluate the model in different settings.

Example usage:
```
CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0 python evaluate_model.py --dataset_name bigmath --llm qwen2.5-3b --max_output_tokens 2048 --lora_rank 32 --num_cpu_threads 8 --confidence_analysis --second_chance_answer_token_limit 64 --sample_size -1 --use_unsloth --no-use_json --use_model rl --responses_per_question 16 --reward_scheme brier-1 --run_suffix xml &> eval_logs/bigmath_qwen2.5-3b_brier-1_llm-confidence-and-analysis_xml.txt &
```

7. Run ```analyze_model.py``` to view results.

Example usage:
```
python analyze_model.py --dataset_name bigmath --llm qwen2.5-3b --confidence_analysis  --use_model rl --reward_scheme brier-1 --run_suffix xml &> analyze_logs/bigmath_qwen2.5-3b_brier-1_llm-confidence-and-analysis_xml_results.txt &
```

Note: For both ```evaluate_model.py``` and ```analyze_model.py```, ```--use_model base``` runs the program on the original model zero-shot while ```--use_model sft``` runs the program on the model after supervised finetuning to follow the reinforcement learning format.

Here is the explanation of the parameter ```--llm```:

| ```--llm```  | LLM  |
|----|----|
| qwen2.5-3b  | unsloth/Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct  |
| llama3.2-3b  | unsloth/Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct  |
| llama3.1-8b  | unsloth/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct  |


Here is the explanation of the parameter ```--reward_scheme``` or ```--reward_function``` (dependent on file):

| ```--reward-scheme```  | Reward Scheme  |
|----|----|
| rlvr  | Correctness-only  |
| log-1  | Log-1  |
| log-no-correctness-reward  | Log loss |
| log-1-div-ln-202 | Log-(1/ln(202)) |
| brier-no-correctness-reward | Brier score |
| brier-1 | Brier-1 |
| brier-2 | Brier-2 |
| brier-log-hybrid | Brier-log Hybrid |
| underconfidence-1 | Underconfidence-1 |
| underconfidence-4 | Underconfidence-4 |
| overconfidence-1 | Overconfidence-1 |
| overconfidence-4 | Overconfidence-4 |
| overconfidence-1000 | Overconfidence-1000 |


### Output Directories

The datasets are stored in the ```datasets``` folder.

```datasets/train``` contains the raw questions, the corresponding ground truth answers and the corresponding difficulty in the training set of each dataset

```datasets/test``` contains the raw questions, the corresponding ground truth answers and the corresponding difficulty in the test set of each dataset

```datasets/sft-train``` contains the raw responses of the LLM during the initial zero-shot run. The questions given to the LLM are a subset of the questions in the corresponding dataset in ```datasets/train```. These responses are used to train the LLM to follow the instructed output format during the fine-tuning stage.

```datasets/rl-train``` contains the properly formatted prompt, the corresponding answer and the difficulty level in the training set of each dataset, to be used during the RL stage. The properly formatted prompts are questions in the ```datasets/train``` folder reformatted as prompts which can be directly fed into the LLM during the RL stage.

The models are stored in the ```models``` folder.

```models/evaluate``` contains the json files that contain question-level statistics on whether the response is correct and the corresponding confidence level. This json file is used to calculate the overall statistics in ```analyze_model.py```.

```models/train``` contains the trained models during the supervised fine-tuning stage, i.e. to train for instruction following

```models/test``` contains the trained models during the RL stage, i.e. the main training for confidence calibration







